README.md, before:

# Google Summer of Code 2022
List of project ideas for students applying to the Google Summer of Code program in 2022 (GSoC 2022).

## Timeline/milestones

The program has been announced and [it is coming with major changes](https://opensource.googleblog.com/2021/11/expanding-google-summer-of-code-in-2022.html).

Please always refer to the [official timeline](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/timeline). 
  
  
## Application Process

#### 0. Get familiar with GSoC

First of all, and if you have not done that yet, read [the student guide](https://google.github.io/gsocguides/student/) which will allow you to understand all this process and how the program works overall. Refer to its left side menu to quick access sections that may interest you the most, although we recommend you to read everything.  
  
#### 1. Discuss the project idea with the mentor(s)

This is a required step unless you have dived in into the existing codebase and understood everything perfectly (very hard) and the idea you prefer is on the list below.

If your idea is not listed, please discuss it with the mentors in the available [contact channels](https://github.com/metacall/gsoc-2021#find-us). We're always open to new ideas and won't hesitate on choosing them if you demonstrate to be a good candidate!  
  
#### 2. Understand that

- You're committing to a project and we may ask you to publicly publish your weekly progress on it.
- It's the second year Metacall is joining the GSoC program and we will ask you to give feedback on our mentorship and management continuously.
- You wholeheartedly agree with the [code of conduct](https://github.com/metacall/core/blob/develop/.github/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
- You must tell us if there's any proposed idea that you don't think would fit the timeline or could be boring (yes, we're asking for feedback).
  
#### 3. Fill out the application form

We recommend you to follow [Google's guide to Writing a Proposal](https://google.github.io/gsocguides/student/writing-a-proposal) as we won't be too harsh on the format and we won't give any template. But hey, we're giving you a starting point!

You can send the proposal link to any readable format you wish: Google Docs, plain text, in markdown... and preferably hosted online, accessible with a common browser **without downloading anything**.

You can also ask for a review anytime to the community or mentor candidates before the student application deadline. It's much easier if you get feedback early than to wait for the last moment.
  

## Project Ideas

You can also propose your own.

### Cross-Platform Builds

**Skills**: C/C++, Bash, Batch, Guix, DevOps

**Size**: Medium Sized Project

**Description**:
MetaCall has multiple runtimes embedded on it and one of its objectives is to be as cross platform as possible. Each runtime has its own dependencies which create a huge dependency tree sometimes. This is a big complexity that is difficult to handle. Currently we are using Guix as our build system in Linux and we achieved to compile MetaCall and make it completely self-contained (in Linux for amd64 at the moment of writting). This allows MetaCall to be installed even in a BusyBox and work properly without any other system dependency. Current implementation of the build system consist of 3 repositories:

 - Distributable Linux: https://github.com/metacall/distributable-linux
 - Distributable Windows: https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows
 - Distributable MacOs: https://github.com/metacall/distributable-macos

The objective of this idea is to improve the cross-platform support for the main supported platforms:
 - Implementing the build script for MacOs from scratch with automated CI, in a similar way to how Windows distributable has been done. Add tests and improve the install script for Linux [by adding support to MacOs](https://github.com/metacall/install/blob/master/install.sh#L213).
 - Improving the language support[[1]](https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows/issues/14)[[2]](https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows/issues/13) for Windows with their [respective tests](https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows/blob/master/test.bat) and [improving the install script](https://github.com/metacall/install/blob/282d193329c6c9bbfca86b5ce4c7db8679f67c88/install.ps1#L158) for Windows.
 - Adding [new architectures](https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/autoconf/manual/autoconf-2.70/html_node/Specifying-Target-Triplets.html#Specifying-Target-Triplets) to Linux with their respective tests (for this it is possible to use Docker multi-architecture for supporting those tests) and the install script support for those architectures.

Finally it would be interesting to add a README in [this repository](https://github.com/metacall/distributable) in order to document the three repositories and build systems.

**Resources**:
 - Guix Build System options: https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Additional-Build-Options.html
 - Docker Multi-Arch support: https://docs.docker.com/desktop/multi-arch/

### Builder

**Skills**: Go, Docker, BuildKit, Sandboxing, Kubernetes

**Size**: Large Project

**Description**:
Currently MetaCall is offered as Docker image on [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/metacall/core). It includes 4 tags (`deps`, `dev`, `runtime` and `cli`) with only one architecture (`amd64`). Right now all the languages are packaged at once into the image, producing a big sized image, specially on the `dev` tag. The idea of this project is to implement a CLI with a separated API which provides a way to generate compact Docker images with MetaCall runtime. Docker does not allow to selectively choose from multiple layers merging them into one with efficient caching, we could do this by means of templating the Dockerfile itself but using the Buildkit API will make the solution much more robust and with the benefit of all the features from Buildkit like caching.

Another main requirement for this project is that it must be run under rootless and daemonless, inside a Dockerized environment (i.e this must be able to be run inside Docker without permissions and without a Docker daemon, so it can be run in a Kubernetes cluster, pushing and pulling the resulting images from a private registry).

This project has to be efficient and sandboxed, focused on FaaS development and producing compact images in terms of size and dependencies, so the bandwidth and attack surface is reduced.

**Resources**:
 - MetaCall Builder repository: https://github.com/metacall/builder
 - MetaCall Core Docker build system: https://github.com/metacall/core/blob/develop/docker-compose.sh | https://github.com/metacall/core/blob/develop/docker-compose.yml | https://github.com/metacall/core/tree/develop/tools
 - Buildkit examples: https://github.com/moby/buildkit/tree/master/examples

### Deploy CLI

**Skills**: TypeScript

**Size**: Large Project

**Description**:
This project will implement a CLI for deploying projects into MetaCall FaaS. This CLI should be able to be integrated with the MetaCall CLI. The objective of this project is to provide an interactive and also automated way to deploy projects into MetaCall FaaS. It has already some of the functionalities provided, and some tests implemented. The CLI should be tested through automated testing and all the requirements listed in the [TODO](https://github.com/metacall/deploy/blob/master/TODO.md) must be achieved.

For better deployment, the Deploy CLI should be integrable with MetaCall CLI, providing a self contained distributable with all the compiled code which can be launched or invoked from an external CLI.

**Resources**:
 - MetaCall Deploy repository: https://github.com/metacall/deploy
 - MetaCall FaaS: https://dashboard.metacall.io
 - Video Deploying a hundred functions into MetaCall FaaS using the Dashobard: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RAqTmQAWEc
 - MetaCall Protocol: https://github.com/metacall/protocol
 - MetaCall FaaS TypeScript reimplementation: https://github.com/metacall/faas

### FaaS TypeScript Reimplementation

**Skills**: TypeScript

**Size**: Large Project

**Description**:
This project offers a reimplementation of [MetaCall FaaS](https://dashboard.metacall.io) but with a simpler and less performant implementation. The objective of this FaaS reimplementation is to provide a simple and portable FaaS that can be run from the CLI in order to locally test the functions and complete projects that can be deployed into MetaCall FaaS. This is a very important part of the project because it is needed in order to fullfill the developer workflow when developing distributed polyglot applications.

It should mimick the [MetaCall FaaS REST API](https://github.com/metacall/deploy/blob/master/src/test/integration.protocol.spec.ts) but without need of authentication and with only the required capabilities for development. This repository will share parts with MetaCall FaaS through [MetaCall Protocol](https://github.com/metacall/protocol) so code can be reused between the repositories.

For better deployment, the MetaCall FaaS should be integrable with MetaCall CLI, providing a self contained distributable with all the compiled code which can be launched or invoked from an external CLI via API.

**Resources**:
 - MetaCall FaaS TypeScript reimplementation repository: https://github.com/metacall/faas
 - MetaCall FaaS: https://dashboard.metacall.io
 - Video Deploying a hundred functions into MetaCall FaaS using the Dashboard: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RAqTmQAWEc
 - MetaCall Protocol: https://github.com/metacall/protocol
 - MetaCall Deploy: https://github.com/metacall/deploy

### MetaCall CLI Bootstrapping / Refactor

**Skills**: C/C++, Python or NodeJS

**Size**: Medium Project

**Description**:
Recently MetaCall has provided support for C language. This means that now we can allow MetaCall to compile itself, or provide core functionality by just using plugins. Thanks to this unlocked feature, we can rewrite the CLI in C and other languages, simplifiying the whole design and making it much more simplified, abstracted and with the possibility of very simple extension in multiple languages. The main objective of this project is to separate the current commands (`load`, `inspect`, `call`...) into separated single function files, where each function/file is mapped to one command. It is also important to provide a good CLI and REPL interface. Right now MetaCall CLI has support for two modes, the CLI and REPL mode. The CLI works as follows:
  - `metacall index.js`
  - `metacall asd.py --some-extra-flag`
  - `metacall pip install flask`

It can run multiple scripts and it can use package managers from the command line. We should unify this interface into a way that can be pluggeable but also consistent, so it can be standardized. For example, in the future we want to add support for [`libseccmp` capabilities](https://github.com/metacall/gsoc-2021#cli-security-through-seccomp-sandboxing), and this should be able to be indicated from the flags in the CLI, and it should be implemented as a plugin too.

The REPL mode is sightly different, it has a list of commands that can be executed and listed when asking for help. Those commands include loading a file, calling to a function, inspecting loaded functions. This REPL must be able to be extended, either adding extra commands or launching sub-REPLs or CLIs that are already implemented in separated repositories. The objective of this is to provide a unified tool that can be easily extended with existing projects easily. An example of those is the [Polyglot REPL](https://github.com/metacall/polyglot-repl) and the [Deploy CLI](https://github.com/metacall/deploy).

All the parsing of the CLI commands and the REPL commands can be mostly fully reimplemented in another language like Python or NodeJS (preferably Python because packages are easier to deploy in Guix, otherwise the NPM package must be provided in a self-contained compiled form). So most of the hard work can be done in a high level language and the CLI can be completely bootstrapped from scratch.

For trying out how the CLI or REPL works right now, you can download it here: https://github.com/metacall/install

The student must send a proper design in order to be accepted before starting the refactor, it can be discussed with the Staff on the [different chats we are available](https://github.com/metacall/gsoc-2022/blob/main/README.md#find-us).

**Resources**:

TODO

### Rust actix + inline tsx

TODO

### Run MetaCall in Browser

TODO

### Polyglot debugger

TODO

### Polyglot IDE

TODO

### Centralize/migrate existing Continuous Integration pipelines to GitHub

TODO

## Find Us

The three chats are bridged by Matrix (messages sent from one can be seen from all).


Telegram:
<a href="https://t.me/joinchat/BMSVbBatp0Vi4s5l4VgUgg" alt="Telegram"><img src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=metacall&message=join&color=blue&logo=telegram&style=flat" /></a>

Discord: 
  <a href="https://discord.gg/upwP4mwJWa" alt="Discord"><img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/781987805974757426?label=discord&style=flat" /></a>

Matrix:
  <a href="https://matrix.to/#/#metacall:matrix.org" alt="Matrix"><img src="https://img.shields.io/matrix/metacall:matrix.org?label=matrix&style=flat" /></a>

Commit message:

add project details for CI/CD project on MetaCall

README.md, after:

# Google Summer of Code 2022
List of project ideas for students applying to the Google Summer of Code program in 2022 (GSoC 2022).

## Timeline/milestones

The program has been announced and [it is coming with major changes](https://opensource.googleblog.com/2021/11/expanding-google-summer-of-code-in-2022.html).

Please always refer to the [official timeline](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/timeline). 
  
  
## Application Process

#### 0. Get familiar with GSoC

First of all, and if you have not done that yet, read [the student guide](https://google.github.io/gsocguides/student/) which will allow you to understand all this process and how the program works overall. Refer to its left side menu to quick access sections that may interest you the most, although we recommend you to read everything.  
  
#### 1. Discuss the project idea with the mentor(s)

This is a required step unless you have dived in into the existing codebase and understood everything perfectly (very hard) and the idea you prefer is on the list below.

If your idea is not listed, please discuss it with the mentors in the available [contact channels](https://github.com/metacall/gsoc-2021#find-us). We're always open to new ideas and won't hesitate on choosing them if you demonstrate to be a good candidate!  
  
#### 2. Understand that

- You're committing to a project and we may ask you to publicly publish your weekly progress on it.
- It's the second year Metacall is joining the GSoC program and we will ask you to give feedback on our mentorship and management continuously.
- You wholeheartedly agree with the [code of conduct](https://github.com/metacall/core/blob/develop/.github/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
- You must tell us if there's any proposed idea that you don't think would fit the timeline or could be boring (yes, we're asking for feedback).
  
#### 3. Fill out the application form

We recommend you to follow [Google's guide to Writing a Proposal](https://google.github.io/gsocguides/student/writing-a-proposal) as we won't be too harsh on the format and we won't give any template. But hey, we're giving you a starting point!

You can send the proposal link to any readable format you wish: Google Docs, plain text, in markdown... and preferably hosted online, accessible with a common browser **without downloading anything**.

You can also ask for a review anytime to the community or mentor candidates before the student application deadline. It's much easier if you get feedback early than to wait for the last moment.
  

## Project Ideas

You can also propose your own.

### Cross-Platform Builds

**Skills**: C/C++, Bash, Batch, Guix, DevOps

**Size**: Medium Sized Project

**Description**:
MetaCall has multiple runtimes embedded on it and one of its objectives is to be as cross platform as possible. Each runtime has its own dependencies which create a huge dependency tree sometimes. This is a big complexity that is difficult to handle. Currently we are using Guix as our build system in Linux and we achieved to compile MetaCall and make it completely self-contained (in Linux for amd64 at the moment of writting). This allows MetaCall to be installed even in a BusyBox and work properly without any other system dependency. Current implementation of the build system consist of 3 repositories:

 - Distributable Linux: https://github.com/metacall/distributable-linux
 - Distributable Windows: https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows
 - Distributable MacOs: https://github.com/metacall/distributable-macos

The objective of this idea is to improve the cross-platform support for the main supported platforms:
 - Implementing the build script for MacOs from scratch with automated CI, in a similar way to how Windows distributable has been done. Add tests and improve the install script for Linux [by adding support to MacOs](https://github.com/metacall/install/blob/master/install.sh#L213).
 - Improving the language support[[1]](https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows/issues/14)[[2]](https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows/issues/13) for Windows with their [respective tests](https://github.com/metacall/distributable-windows/blob/master/test.bat) and [improving the install script](https://github.com/metacall/install/blob/282d193329c6c9bbfca86b5ce4c7db8679f67c88/install.ps1#L158) for Windows.
 - Adding [new architectures](https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/autoconf/manual/autoconf-2.70/html_node/Specifying-Target-Triplets.html#Specifying-Target-Triplets) to Linux with their respective tests (for this it is possible to use Docker multi-architecture for supporting those tests) and the install script support for those architectures.

Finally it would be interesting to add a README in [this repository](https://github.com/metacall/distributable) in order to document the three repositories and build systems.

**Resources**:
 - Guix Build System options: https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Additional-Build-Options.html
 - Docker Multi-Arch support: https://docs.docker.com/desktop/multi-arch/

### Builder

**Skills**: Go, Docker, BuildKit, Sandboxing, Kubernetes

**Size**: Large Project

**Description**:
Currently MetaCall is offered as Docker image on [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/metacall/core). It includes 4 tags (`deps`, `dev`, `runtime` and `cli`) with only one architecture (`amd64`). Right now all the languages are packaged at once into the image, producing a big sized image, specially on the `dev` tag. The idea of this project is to implement a CLI with a separated API which provides a way to generate compact Docker images with MetaCall runtime. Docker does not allow to selectively choose from multiple layers merging them into one with efficient caching, we could do this by means of templating the Dockerfile itself but using the Buildkit API will make the solution much more robust and with the benefit of all the features from Buildkit like caching.

Another main requirement for this project is that it must be run under rootless and daemonless, inside a Dockerized environment (i.e this must be able to be run inside Docker without permissions and without a Docker daemon, so it can be run in a Kubernetes cluster, pushing and pulling the resulting images from a private registry).

This project has to be efficient and sandboxed, focused on FaaS development and producing compact images in terms of size and dependencies, so the bandwidth and attack surface is reduced.

**Resources**:
 - MetaCall Builder repository: https://github.com/metacall/builder
 - MetaCall Core Docker build system: https://github.com/metacall/core/blob/develop/docker-compose.sh | https://github.com/metacall/core/blob/develop/docker-compose.yml | https://github.com/metacall/core/tree/develop/tools
 - Buildkit examples: https://github.com/moby/buildkit/tree/master/examples

### Deploy CLI

**Skills**: TypeScript

**Size**: Large Project

**Description**:
This project will implement a CLI for deploying projects into MetaCall FaaS. This CLI should be able to be integrated with the MetaCall CLI. The objective of this project is to provide an interactive and also automated way to deploy projects into MetaCall FaaS. It has already some of the functionalities provided, and some tests implemented. The CLI should be tested through automated testing and all the requirements listed in the [TODO](https://github.com/metacall/deploy/blob/master/TODO.md) must be achieved.

For better deployment, the Deploy CLI should be integrable with MetaCall CLI, providing a self contained distributable with all the compiled code which can be launched or invoked from an external CLI.

**Resources**:
 - MetaCall Deploy repository: https://github.com/metacall/deploy
 - MetaCall FaaS: https://dashboard.metacall.io
 - Video Deploying a hundred functions into MetaCall FaaS using the Dashobard: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RAqTmQAWEc
 - MetaCall Protocol: https://github.com/metacall/protocol
 - MetaCall FaaS TypeScript reimplementation: https://github.com/metacall/faas

### FaaS TypeScript Reimplementation

**Skills**: TypeScript

**Size**: Large Project

**Description**:
This project offers a reimplementation of [MetaCall FaaS](https://dashboard.metacall.io) but with a simpler and less performant implementation. The objective of this FaaS reimplementation is to provide a simple and portable FaaS that can be run from the CLI in order to locally test the functions and complete projects that can be deployed into MetaCall FaaS. This is a very important part of the project because it is needed in order to fullfill the developer workflow when developing distributed polyglot applications.

It should mimick the [MetaCall FaaS REST API](https://github.com/metacall/deploy/blob/master/src/test/integration.protocol.spec.ts) but without need of authentication and with only the required capabilities for development. This repository will share parts with MetaCall FaaS through [MetaCall Protocol](https://github.com/metacall/protocol) so code can be reused between the repositories.

For better deployment, the MetaCall FaaS should be integrable with MetaCall CLI, providing a self contained distributable with all the compiled code which can be launched or invoked from an external CLI via API.

**Resources**:
 - MetaCall FaaS TypeScript reimplementation repository: https://github.com/metacall/faas
 - MetaCall FaaS: https://dashboard.metacall.io
 - Video Deploying a hundred functions into MetaCall FaaS using the Dashboard: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RAqTmQAWEc
 - MetaCall Protocol: https://github.com/metacall/protocol
 - MetaCall Deploy: https://github.com/metacall/deploy

### MetaCall CLI Bootstrapping / Refactor

**Skills**: C/C++, Python or NodeJS

**Size**: Medium Project

**Description**:
Recently MetaCall has provided support for C language. This means that now we can allow MetaCall to compile itself, or provide core functionality by just using plugins. Thanks to this unlocked feature, we can rewrite the CLI in C and other languages, simplifiying the whole design and making it much more simplified, abstracted and with the possibility of very simple extension in multiple languages. The main objective of this project is to separate the current commands (`load`, `inspect`, `call`...) into separated single function files, where each function/file is mapped to one command. It is also important to provide a good CLI and REPL interface. Right now MetaCall CLI has support for two modes, the CLI and REPL mode. The CLI works as follows:
  - `metacall index.js`
  - `metacall asd.py --some-extra-flag`
  - `metacall pip install flask`

It can run multiple scripts and it can use package managers from the command line. We should unify this interface into a way that can be pluggeable but also consistent, so it can be standardized. For example, in the future we want to add support for [`libseccmp` capabilities](https://github.com/metacall/gsoc-2021#cli-security-through-seccomp-sandboxing), and this should be able to be indicated from the flags in the CLI, and it should be implemented as a plugin too.

The REPL mode is sightly different, it has a list of commands that can be executed and listed when asking for help. Those commands include loading a file, calling to a function, inspecting loaded functions. This REPL must be able to be extended, either adding extra commands or launching sub-REPLs or CLIs that are already implemented in separated repositories. The objective of this is to provide a unified tool that can be easily extended with existing projects easily. An example of those is the [Polyglot REPL](https://github.com/metacall/polyglot-repl) and the [Deploy CLI](https://github.com/metacall/deploy).

All the parsing of the CLI commands and the REPL commands can be mostly fully reimplemented in another language like Python or NodeJS (preferably Python because packages are easier to deploy in Guix, otherwise the NPM package must be provided in a self-contained compiled form). So most of the hard work can be done in a high level language and the CLI can be completely bootstrapped from scratch.

For trying out how the CLI or REPL works right now, you can download it here: https://github.com/metacall/install

The student must send a proper design in order to be accepted before starting the refactor, it can be discussed with the Staff on the [different chats we are available](https://github.com/metacall/gsoc-2022/blob/main/README.md#find-us).

**Resources**:

TODO

### Rust actix + inline tsx

TODO

### Run MetaCall in Browser

TODO

### Polyglot debugger

TODO

### Polyglot IDE

TODO

### Migrate existing CI/CD pipelines to GitHub

**Skills**: GitHub Actions, YAML, BASH, CMake 
**Size**: Medium project
**Description**:

Currently, the Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment pipelines are hosted on GitLab and uses their in-built GitLab CI. We use particular scripts to manage our automated testing and deployment through GitLab CI. The objective of this project is to migrate our CI/CD pipelines and deployment to GitHub Actions and GitHub Container Registry. GitHub Actions is free for public projects and does not limit our CI/CD minutes per month, hence providing a credible way of testing and deploying. Through GitHub Container Registry, we would like to centralize all our Docker images under our GitHub organization, while escaping the rate limiting issues around Docker Hub.

The project would involve writing workflows using GitHub Actions to automate this process and allow the project to be built on every push and pull request event. We would also like to implement remote caching for faster builds, CI/CD matrix for testing on various architectures, and improving the developer experience for contributors. Finally it would be interesting to document the whole CI/CD strategy and workflow, for rest of the community to adopt this work as a best practise.

Resources:

- GitHub Actions: https://github.com/features/actions
- GitHub Container Registry: https://ghcr.io/
- Ccache: https://ccache.dev/
- MetaCall on GitLab: https://gitlab.com/metacall/core

## Find Us

The three chats are bridged by Matrix (messages sent from one can be seen from all).


Telegram:
<a href="https://t.me/joinchat/BMSVbBatp0Vi4s5l4VgUgg" alt="Telegram"><img src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=metacall&message=join&color=blue&logo=telegram&style=flat" /></a>

Discord: 
  <a href="https://discord.gg/upwP4mwJWa" alt="Discord"><img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/781987805974757426?label=discord&style=flat" /></a>

Matrix:
  <a href="https://matrix.to/#/#metacall:matrix.org" alt="Matrix"><img src="https://img.shields.io/matrix/metacall:matrix.org?label=matrix&style=flat" /></a>
